Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson.
In addition to being an author, Terry Carr is one of Science Fiction's premier editors.
We asked him how he got hooked on science fiction back in the late 1940s.
Oh, that's kind of interesting.
Most people don't believe this story, but I actually discovered science fiction when
I was wandering around at Garbage Dump.
There was a garbage dump a few blocks from our house, and I liked it at that time.
I was about ten or eleven or something.
Sometimes friends and I would just go down and look around to see what people were throwing
out.
And one day, among the things we found, people had thrown out were a couple of old cult magazines
from the year before.
Amazing stories, and I think there was one amazing story and one fantastic adventure,
those being companion magazines.
We grabbed those and brought them home, and I loved them.
I got hooked right there.
After publishing a couple early novels and some short stories, Carr began his editing
career at Ace Books.
We asked him if he could tell us exactly what he did for Ace.
Yeah, in 1964, I went to work for Ace Books as an editorial assistant, which actually
meant that I was low-man on the totem pole there.
I was simply somebody who copied the manuscript, went over them to make sure the spelling was
correct and things like that.
There were no typographical errors.
And then proofread the books before they actually got published to make sure once again that
there were no typographical errors in the type setting.
I would write blurbs, cover copy, kind of, you know, the things that are written on the
front and back covers of paperback books to try to get you to be interested enough in
the book to buy it.
And at the same time, I was reading a number of submissions that were coming in.
If I saw something good, I would pass it on to the editor, who was found at Wollinheim.
Carr says he then began to make suggestions for improving and expanding the Ace Line of
Science Fiction books, and he worked his way up in the company.
Ace Books then did start doing a number of things that I had suggested, so that I began
getting this and that promotion.
And I think after about the first three years, I became a senior editor there.
And began a series called the Ace Science Fiction Specials, which was very much a departure
for Ace Books in particular, but for the entire field for that matter, because it was specifically
designed to publish adult science fiction novels, not simply a juvenile adventure, but
serious novels using the science fiction genre as its format, and packaged uniformly so that
people would be able to recognize a new book in the series when it came out, and packaged
in such a way that, you know, it didn't have monsters chasing half-naked women on the covers.
We had very good artwork by a team of artists called Leo and Diane Dillon, who later won
a Hugo Award and won two Caldecott Awards, and God knows what else they were, extremely good artists.
I also began anthologizing very early when I started there.
Don Wollinheim and I were collaborating on an anthology, an annual anthology called World's Best Science Fiction.
And I gradually branched out from that, since I had begun to have my name on anthologies.
I began to do others for Double Day and Flosset Books and so on.
And that was actually how I got my start doing anthologies, was the work that I was doing in Ace Books.
Some of the anthologies Carr does include the annual Universe series of original science fiction,
which he originated in 1971, and the Best Science Fiction of the Year series, which he began in 1972.
We'll talk to Terry Carr next time about what it's like to edit anthologies of science fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
Each year, Terry Carr edits two of the best known anthologies in science fiction.
One is the Universe series, begun in 1971, which is an anthology of original science fiction.
We ask Carr the difference to an author between selling his story to a monthly science fiction magazine,
or selling it to an anthology like Universe.
There are all sorts of differences.
They're both artistic and monetary differences.
For one thing, if you sell to a magazine, then the money that you get from the magazine is simply the payment for that use of the story.
If you sell it to an original anthology, that's going into a book, and you get an advance payment.
But after that, you get a share of the royalties.
If the book sells well, then there will be additional earnings on the book.
And the individual authors will continue to make money for years thereafter, and indeed they do on Universe, because it does sell pretty well.
So your chances of making money on your story are at least as good, I would say, in the original anthologies as they are in the science fiction magazines.
Aside from that, there's also the fact that a lot of writers simply like to have their work appear in book form,
because they know it's going to be around to be read longer than a magazine will be.
It'll stay in better shape, and it'll be in library or something like that.
The best science fiction of the year, which Carr began in 1972 with Donald Walheim, is a different sort of anthology.
It consists of stories published in science fiction magazines during the year.
Carr reads all the magazines, then selects those stories he considers to be the best.
But he says that there are certain problems that he has to solve when he actually starts putting the stories together.
And if it should ever happen, for instance, that I think the best 15 stories of the year, however many it takes, are all time travel stories, for instance.
I'm not going to publish a whole book, but with time travel stories, that's just silly.
Again, people would get tired of reading so many time travel stories in one book.
So I try to mix up the themes, too.
Carr explains the particular needs an anthology fulfills.
As best I know, anthology fills the need for people who want to read good science fiction short stories, novelettes, novellas, whatever.
People who want to read something other than a novel.
Probably people who want to have something that they can dip into from time to time, rather than sitting down and reading the whole thing straight through as they would a novel.
There's a different psychology between reading novels and short stories, and most people do prefer to read novels.
They always sell better than anthologies or single author short story collections.
But there are people who like the short stories. I do, for instance.
And they're the people who buy these.
On a re-pandemology, the attraction, I think, is that these stories have been doubly screened.
There are stories that were good enough in the first place to sell to the magazine.
And then beyond that, there are the best stories from the magazine.
So the people who pick up an anthology can reasonably expect that that is going to contain more good stories than the average issue of a science fiction magazine.
This isn't always true. There's very bad anthologies and there's very good issues in magazines.
But by and large, that is the case, I think.
Terry Carr also writes fine science fiction. Next time we'll talk to him about some of his own writing.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The first time we've seen a science fiction magazine, we've seen a lot of science fiction.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
Among the science fiction anthologies that Terry Carr has edited over the years are the so-called Specialized Anthologies.
These would be volumes of short stories with a particular theme uniting them.
For example, a book of short stories on robots, or time travel.
Carr has done many special anthologies. We spoke with him about a few of them.
He explains the rationale behind his 1966 anthology, Science Fiction for People Who Hate Science Fiction.
I wanted, first, that the story should be good stories.
And second, that the story should be accessible to people who don't know the specialized language of science fiction.
There are a whole lot of assumptions that are just automatic in science fiction, and nobody bothers to explain them anymore.
So there are a lot of stories that are published these days that really require a certain amount of background in reading science fiction in order to understand them.
I mean, nobody stops to explain what a Star Warp Drive is anymore, because that gets a little bit tiresome after a while.
We all know how a Star Warp Drive works, more or less.
Or at least we think we do.
But to somebody who's never heard of that before, that can be kind of confusing.
Or the intricacies of the morality of robot behavior, or the strange instances of time paradoxes.
Things like that can be very confusing to someone first coming to science fiction.
So the stories that I chose for that book were stories that had very simple dramatic ideas that were very easy to understand to someone who was not used to science fiction right away.
But that were also very good stories.
A more recent anthology is one carted for the Sierra Club, entitled Dreams Edge, Science Fiction Stories About the Planet Earth.
The origin of that was that the Sierra Club themselves decided they wanted to publish science fiction anthology.
And they looked around for someone to do it, and they eventually landed on me.
The main problem I had with that book was that there were too many stories in it that were downbeat and depressing.
If you start writing about the ecology of Earth, which is what the theme of that was.
Well, everything's going wrong these days, as you know.
And nobody really has any answers about what we could do about it.
So even though I think all the stories are very good, there are only a few of them that hold out a whole lot of hope.
Most of them are about the problems and the ironies of messing around with the environment and so on.
In 1978, Carr put together an anthology many people consider his finest.
It's called Classic Science Fiction, the first golden age.
For this one, Carr chose stories from the years 1940 and 1942, a critical time in the development of modern science fiction.
While Carr selected stories, he did something else that makes the volume of particular interest.
But at the same time, I also did a lot of research on the writers, on the editors, publishing companies, the artists, and so forth.
The conditions under which they worked, how much money they were actually able to make.
And I wrote a great deal of introductory material, background material about the writers and what they were doing, how they came to write each individual story.
And I think the anthology itself contains a number of just classic stories.
It's a basic anthology for anybody's science fiction library.
But in addition to that, that background material is fascinating.
It tells a whole lot of things about how things happened and why they happened.
And it also tells a number of pretty amusing stories about things that went on behind the scenes.
I really enjoyed doing the work.
We'll have more with Terry Carr next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
Editor and author Terry Carr has published three science fiction novels.
The first two, Warlord of Core, an invasion from 2500. Go back to the early 1960s and are pot boilers in the pulp tradition.
But his most recent novel is a different thing entirely.
It's a tightly constructed work with symbolic and allegorical depth.
Entitled Cirque, it was published in 1977. Carr tells us where the idea for the book originated.
Cirque is actually the Bay Area in some sense anyway, not literally.
But the fact is that I live in the hills of Oakland in the East Bay.
And there's a drive along the ridge of the hills.
And I was up there one evening just at dusk when the light is such that the bay itself, which you can look down on,
you'll see San Francisco and Marin County across the bay, and San Jose to the south and Berkeley and Oakland in front of you.
And a lot of water in the middle, but at a particular time of the evening, that water simply turned black.
And I was up there looking at that and I thought, my God, you can't even tell at the bay it looks like a gigantic hole in the ground.
And immediately I thought, what would a city be like to build around a gigantic shaft into the earth like that?
What effect might that kind of physical environment have on the psychology of those people who lived in that city?
Carr explores the psychology and destiny of various inhabitants of the city's Cirque during unusual days of occurrences.
On that day some monsters rise out of the abyss the city is built around.
The monsters are huge and ominous, and the reaction of Carr's characters to them forms the basis of the book.
Near the end of the novel, the monsters, after threatening the inhabitants of Cirque, turn into flowers.
This episode, along with many others in the book, suggests a symbolic intent on Carr's part.
We asked him if there was deliberate symbolism in the book.
Oh yes, that is definitely deliberate.
I knew the general outline of the story.
I just didn't know the specifics of who was going to do what at which time and where they were going to be and so on.
The symbolism is built into the whole concept of the story.
And I tried not to make that show too much on the top.
I wanted the surface to be a story that was interesting in and of itself.
Because I don't believe that symbolism itself should ever try to carry a story that warms me to tears.
On the other hand, if you have a good story up front, and beneath that story is symbolism, preferably emotional symbolism, not just intellectual cuteness.
I think that strengthens the story a good deal.
Carr explains why I chose the title Cirque for the novel.
Look, of course, is about a city which is built around a gigantic chasm into the ground.
And so the city is named Cirque, which is French for Circle, and has other connotations too.
It also, for instance, it's the French word for Cirque.
There was kind of a surface, there were a whole lot of strange things going on at once in the book.
And the construction of the book is circular.
It starts at dawn on one day, and it goes ahead to finish at dawn the next day.
And it finishes at the same place in the city where it began with the same characters there.
So in all those ways, Cirque or Circle was the perfect title for the book.
The only thing it really had going against it is that nobody knows how to pronounce it.
We'll have more from Terry Carr next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Terry Carr.
And David Carson.
One of his better known creations is the mysterious millipede in the novel Cirque.
The dance of the changer in the three is one of those stories.
I had been reading of all people Roger's Alarm, we've seen him mention him a lot here.
And Roger at that time, this was in the late 60s, was working a lot with mythology in his science fiction.
And I got interested in his work, I loved his work, and I was always interested in mythology itself.
And it occurred to me that mythology tells a whole lot about the fears, the hopes, the beliefs of humanity.
And that indeed, if any alien creature ever came to this planet and wanted to find out something about what makes humanity tick,
they could do far worse than to study some of our myths.
And I suddenly just, there was a little psectic that goes on in your head and I turned that around and said,
well, I like to think and write about aliens, and it's very difficult to write about an alien from the inside,
because I personally believe that aliens are inexplicable to us, but we're never going to understand this fully.
So I thought, possibly a good way of dealing with the portrayal of an alien or an entire alien race would be to do it
circuitously by telling an alien myth. And that is exactly what the dance of the changer in the three years, of course, is an alien myth.
And the myth itself is supposed to tell you a lot about the psychology of the race.
We never do understand the psychology of the aliens in the story.
The human narrator describes certain actions and some of the dialogue of the aliens, but the significance of all of this is never clear.
The climax of the story occurs when the aliens, who are creatures of pure energy, inexplicably destroy almost all the humans on their planet.
And they do it without malice, while they are performing one of the ritual dances that belong to their mythology.
We ask our if there is perhaps some reason for this massacre, something we missed in reading the story.
We could write something that made no sense, whatever. So the myth itself, of course, is kind of a self-canceling myth.
If you actually analyze it, there's a certain circularity to it. It has a dramatic coherence.
But it's not a story that we would ever tell about ourselves that would resonate with the human psyche.
And I wanted to end the story with something totally inexplicable happening, just to underscore and emphasize the fact that these creatures were aliens.
And I wanted it to be something that none of us is going to understand, and that meant inevitably that I had to be sure I didn't understand it either.
One of the points of the story then seems to be that humans could never understand an alien species. We ask Tarif, his interpretation was correct.
Yeah, that was the basic point. I've been trying to make that point in a number of my stories.
This is another one that I wrote earlier called Top Friends, which makes much the same point, but not quite as dramatically as that did.
Carr's premise in the Dance of the Changer in the Three is an interesting one, very different from the common science fiction notions of aliens as either hostile bug-eyed monsters or as creatures we can become close to.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.